=head1 NAME

SendmailAnalyzer - Sendmail/Postfix log analyzer

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SendmailAnalyzer as its name suggests is a Sendmail log analyzer. It processes
maillog files and generates dynamic statistics in HTML and graphical output.
The reports are generated in real time so that it lets you know at any moment
what is going on your mail servers. It uses time (hour, day, month and year
views) and cross-linked navigation for easy use.

SendmailAnalyzer is easy to install and highly configurable to match the dozen
of Sendmail possible configurations. It also supports report for all the major
milter or sendmail filters like SpamAssassin, MailScanner, Clamav, etc.

Collected data is stored in flat files that are automatically archived or
deleted to keep disk space. All reports before the current day are cached to
save system resources and are displayed in the 1 second into your browser.

SendmailAnalyzer can be run on a home dedicated mail server, on multiple
enterprise mail servers and on ISP mail servers for free. His low resources
usage allow SendmailAnalyzer appliance embedding. Since version 8.0 the caching
mechanism has a very low memory footprint as well as the reports views.

This is the most advanced and complete statistics tool dedicated to
the great Sendmail MTA. It's goal is not to support any kind of MTA or
other log format but only being a full featured tool for Sendmail users and
administrators. If you're searching something more general take a look at
SawMill, it's not so bad :-)

=head1 POSTFIX SUPPORT

SendmailAnalyzer is a statistical dedicated tool for Sendmail and it is very
good in this task. As many people asked me to have such free tool for the
Postfix MTA, Since release v7.0 SendmailAnalyzer now also supports the Postfix
mail.log statistics report.

Postfix is now fully supported, if you have any issues or unsupported features
please let me know. Note that as I don't use Postfix I may ask you for log
files to reproduce some issues or develop features.

=head1 FEATURES

It reports all you ever wanted to know about email trafic on your network.

=head2 Global Statistics 

All the following reports also show statistics per bytes and average
of bytes per message.

=over 4

=item *

Number of inbound messages.

=item *

Number of outbound messages.

=item *

Number of inbound spams.

=item *

Number of outbound spams.

=item *

Number of inbound virus.

=item *

Number of outbound virus.

=item *

Sendmail rejection rules flow.

=item *

Syserr flow (Sendmail error messages).

=item * 

Sendmail DSN Flow (Delivery Status Notification)

=item *

The global MTA status allocation per messages, bytes and percentage.

=item *

Distributed messages coming from Internet.

=item *

Distributed messages sent internaly.

=item *

Distributed messages sent to Internet.

=item *

Distributed messages coming from and going to Internet.

=item *

Sendmail SMTP Auth statistics by type (server or client), mechanismi and user.

=item *

Postgrey usage statistics.

=back

If you deliver marqued spam / virus to recipients, SendmailAnalyzer
will report the delivery flow for:

=over 4

=item *

Spam / virus coming from Internet.

=item *

Spam / virus sent internaly.

=item *

Spam / virus sent to Internet.

=item *

Spam / virus coming from and going to Internet.

=back

Note: In the report you will see 'local' inbound or outbound message, that
mean a mail coming from (sender relay) or going to (recipient relay) the mail
server.  This is not the same that internal, which mean coming from or sent to
your internal network / private domain.


=head2 Top Statistics

Once you have defined in the configuration file the Top Max statistics to show
(25 by default), the Max Recipient for a message (25 by default), the message
Size Max (5Mb by default) you will see the top statistics of:

=over 4

=item *

Top sender domain, top sender relay, top sender address.

=item *

Top recipient domain, top recipient relay, top recipients address.

=item *

Top spams rules, top spammers domain, top spammers relays, top spammers address,
top spam recipients address.

=item *

Top virus name, top virus sender, top virus sender relay, top virus recipient
address, top infected filename.

=item *

Top DSN status, top DSN sender, top DSN Relay, top DSN recipient address.

=item *

Top rejection rules, top rejected domain, top rejected relay, top rejected
sender, top rejection status.

=item *

Top Sendmail Error messages.

=item *

Top max number of recipient for one message.

=item *

Top max size message with number of recipients and sender address.

=item *

Top Sendmail SMTP Auth mechanisms, relays and users (server or client).

=item *

Top Postgrey status, relay, senders and recipients.

=back

Note: on daily view you can click on each of the reported element to see the
detailed information. For example if you follow link on a sender relay you
will see all messages detailled information coming from that relay.
This kind of navigation is only available for the days of the current month
to keep disk space, memory usage and privacy.


=head2 ISP like feature

Begining at version 4.0 of SendmailAnalyzer some features could be related
to an ISP like environment and allow statistics on very huge SMTP flow:

=over 4

=item *

Support centralized maillog for multiple Sendmail serveurs througth rsyslog.

=item *

Support per domain reports with user access control.

=item *

Support per user reports. Each user can see is own statistics. (Removed in v5.0 until now)

=item *

Low memory usage, small disk space utilization and really speed with daily caching.

=item *

Support parsing of compressed maillog file.

=back

=head2 Milter / Filter supported

SendmailAnalyzer supports some of the most used milter and filter for
spam and virus filtering. If you don't find yours drop me a line and
it will be included.

=over 4

=item *

MimeDefang Spam and Virus reports

=item *

Amavis Spam / Virus detection

=item *

Clamav virus detection

=item *

Jchkmail Spam / Virus report

=item *

MailScanner Spam / virus detection

=item *

SpamAssassin Spam detection (spamd output)

=item *

Sendmail DNSLB report (check_relay)

=item *

Sendmail DSN (Delivery Status Notification)

=item *

DNSLB-Milter Spam detection

=back

If your one is not listed here and you can send me some relevant
maillog lines I can add his support in a day.


=head2 New features

If you need new features and support for new/other milters or filters,
let me know. This helps a lot to develop a better/useful tool. This
piece of software is widely used at my work (espacially for IT report)
but this reflects only a part of the Sendmail usage.

=head2 Internationalization

SendmailAnalyzer can be translated to any language with your contribution.
At this time supported language are: French, English, Spanish, Bulgarian, German.
If you want to add your own language, it's really simple, take a look in
the cgi-bin/lang/ directory and send me the translation file.


=head1 REQUIREMENT

SendmailAnalyzer can work in any platform where Sendmail and Perl could run.
What you need is a modern Perl distribution - 5.8.x or more is good, but older
versions should also work.

You need the following Perl modules. If they are not yet include in your
OS distribution you can always find them at http://search.cpan.org/

	MIME::Base64;
	MIME::QuotedPrint;

Those modules are normaly already included in Perl core modules on modern
distributions.

The graph output is generated using the flotr2 javascript library so no need
to install additional library or package, you just need a modern browser.

=head1 INSTALLATION

=head2 Generic install

Here are the generic installation steps, but if you want you can create and
install your own distribution package, see "Package install" bellow.

1) Unpack the distribution tarball in the desired location as follow:

	tar xzf sendmailanalyzer-x.x.tar.gz
	cd sendmailanalyzer-x.x/
	perl Makefile.PL
	make && make install

2) Follow the instructions given at the end of install. With this default
install everything will be installed under /usr/local/sendmailanalyzer.

3) Edit sendmailanalyzer.conf file to customize your SendmailAnalyzer reports.
See the configuration file and CONFIGURATION section bellow for usage.

=head2 Post install

1. Start SendmailAnalyzer daemon with:

	/usr/local/sendmailanalyzer/sendmailanalyzer -f

or use one of the starters script provided in the start_scripts/ directory.

2. Modify your httpd.conf to allow access to CGI scripts like follow:

	Alias /sareport /usr/local/sendmailanalyzer/www
	<Directory /usr/local/sendmailanalyzer/www>
		Options ExecCGI
		AddHandler cgi-script .cgi
		DirectoryIndex sa_report.cgi
		Order deny,allow
		Deny from all
		Allow from 127.0.0.1
		Allow from ::1
		# Allow from .example.com
	</Directory>

3. If necessary, give additional host access to SendmailAnalyzer in httpd.conf. Restart and ensure that httpd is running.

4. Browse to http://mta.host.dom/sareport/ to ensure that things are working properly.

5. Setup a cronjob to run sa_cache and restart SendmailAnalyzer daemon after maillog logrotate as follow:

	# SendmailAnalyzer log reporting daily cache
	0 1 * * * /usr/local/sendmailanalyzer/sa_cache > /dev/null 2>&1
	# On huge MTA you may want to have five minutes caching
	#*/5 * * * * /usr/local/sendmailanalyzer/sa_cache -a > /dev/null 2>&1

6. Add an entry in /etc/logrotate.d/syslog to restart SendmailAnalyzer when maillog is rotated or create a cron job.

=head2 Log rotate case

If you use real time mode and you have logrotate installed on you maillog
file you must restart SendmailAnalyzer each time logrotate is used.
To install it edit the /etc/logrotate.d/syslog file and add a line
in the postrotate part, for example:

	/var/log/cron /var/log/debug /var/log/maillog /var/log/messages /var/log/secure /var/log/spooler /var/log/syslog {
	    sharedscripts
	    postrotate
		/bin/kill -HUP `cat /var/run/syslogd.pid 2>/dev/null` 2>/dev/null || true
		/bin/kill -HUP `cat /var/run/sendmailanalyzer.pid`  2>/dev/null || true
		# or /etc/init.d/sendmailanalyzer restart >/dev/null 2>&1 || true
	    endscript
	}

If you are using rsyslog the file is named /etc/logrotate.d/rsyslog, things
must be written differently, but not so much. For example:

        postrotate
            reload rsyslog >/dev/null 2>&1 || true
            /bin/kill -HUP `cat /var/run/sendmailanalyzer.pid`  2>/dev/null || true
        endscript

And if you have an operating system that use systemd, you can set the following
in the service file:

	ExecStop=/usr/bin/pkill -TERM sendmailanalyzer

and in /etc/logrotate.d/syslog adding this to postrotate section:

	/usr/bin/systemctl restart sendmailanalyzer.service > /dev/null 2>&1 || true


=head2 Package install

In the packaging/ directory you will find all scripts and files to generate
a binary RPM, Slackware and Debian package. See README in this directory.

=head2 Custom install

You can create your fully customized SendmailAnalyzer installation by using
the Makefile.PL Perl script. Here is a sample:

        perl Makefile.PL \
                LOGFILE=/var/log/maillog \
                BINDIR=/usr/bin \
                CONFDIR=/etc \
                PIDDIR=/var/run \
                BASEDIR=/var/lib/sendmailanalyzer \
                HTMLDIR=/var/www/sendmailanalyzer \
                MANDIR=/usr/man/man3 \
                DOCDIR=/usr/share/doc/sendmailanalyzer

If you want to build a distro package, there are two other options that you may
use. The QUIET option is to tell to Makefile.PL to not show the default post
install README. The DESTDIR is to create and install all files in a package
build base directory. For example for Fedora RPM, thing may look like that:

        # Make Perl and SendmailAnalyzer distrib files
        %{__perl} Makefile.PL \
            INSTALLDIRS=vendor \
            QUIET=1 \
            LOGFILE=/var/log/maillog \
            BINDIR=%{_bindir} \
            CONFDIR=%{_sysconfdir} \
            PIDDIR=%{rundir} \
            BASEDIR=%{_localstatedir}/lib/%{uname} \
            HTMLDIR=%{webdir} \
            MANDIR=%{_mandir}/man3 \
            DOCDIR=%{_docdir}/%{uname}-%{version} \
            DESTDIR=%{buildroot} < /dev/null

See the spec file in packaging/RPM for the full RPM build script.

=head1 USAGE

There are two ways to use SendmailAnalyzer. If you don't need real time
you can run it each night so that maillog will be parsed and reports
generated once a day. Note that if you have a huge MTA load this is not
a good solution.

The other way is to run it in daemon mode, in this way it can parse huge
maillog (million line per day) preserving system resources.

To know all possible command line arguments, run 'sendmailanalyzer --help'

Important: if you experience high memory usage with SendmailAnalyzer
use the -w (--write-delay) command line option to reduce the time where in
memory data are flushed to disk. Default is 60 secondes, this is good in most
configuration but in huge servers you may set it as low as 5 secondes.
You must test it to find a compromise between speed and memory usage.

=head2 Standalone

To run SendmailAnalyzer in standalone mode you have to setup a cron
entry each night as follow assuming log and configuration files in
default place (/var/log/maillog and /usr/local/sendmailanalyzer/sendmailanalyzer.conf):

	/usr/local/sendmailanalyzer/sendmailanalyzer -i -b -f

This will run the program in interactive mode (-i), parse full maillog seeking
after the last run ending position (-f) and exiting at end of maillog parsing
(-b). 

=head2 Daemon mode

To run SendmailAnalyzer as a daemon, use the start/stop/restart script given
with the distribution (in start_script/ directory). See the README file in
that directory for more explanation about how to install.

It will start as 'sendmailanalyzer -f' that tells it to start in daemon mode
(default), parse full maillog seeking after the last run ending position (-f)
and to open a pipe to a tail command on /var/log/maillog. It will never end
until you kill it or restart it.

To restart sendmailanalyzer use the SIGHUP signal as follows :

	/bin/kill -HUP `cat /var/run/sendmailanalyzer.pid`
or
	/usr/bin/pkill -HUP sendmailanalyzer

This will force sendmailanalyzer to reread its configuration file and reopen
a pipe to the tail command on you mail log file. The original command line
arguments that you've given at startup will be preserved.


Important: If you have syslog rotate enable (I hope so :-) you will have to
restart SendmailAnalyzer after each log rotation to always tail the good file
descriptor.

Edit /etc/logrotate.d/syslog and add the following after syslog restart:

	/bin/kill -HUP `cat /var/run/sendmailanalyzer.pid`  2>/dev/null || true

or
	/etc/rc.d/rc.sendmailanalyzer restart /dev/null 2>&1 || true

or on Debian/Redhat like system

	/etc/init.d/sendmailanalyzer restart /dev/null 2>&1 || true

or with systemd:

	/usr/bin/systemctl restart sendmailanalyzer.service > /dev/null 2>&1 || true

this must be in the postrotate section.

=head2 Stopping SendmailAnalyzer

Just kill it with SIGTERM signal it will flush current collected object
to disk and free open files.

	kill -TERM `cat /var/run/sendmailanalyzer.pid`'
or
	pkill -TERM sendmailanalyzer
	
use the starter script. This will kill the current sendmailanalyzer
process and the pipe to the tail command.

=head2 Caching

SendmailAnalyzer collects maillog entries to write data to flat files,
when you run the CGI script sa_report.cgi it has to read each data file
for the given period to compute statistics and output HTML reports.
This can be enough for day views but when you jump to month view it
costs a lot in CPU and memory usage unless you have a home MTA.

To speed up things and free system resources you have to run the script
sa_cache each night by cron to create cache files. After that viewing
a month or year view take less than a second.

The script sa_cache must be run by cron as follows:

	/usr/local/sendmailanalyzer/sa_cache >/dev/null 2>&1

If you have set per domain report sa_cache will create cache files for each
domains. These cache files are named cache.pm for the MTA global statistics
and cache.pmYOURDOMAIM.DOM for each domain report. To lower the memory
footprint of the sa_cache program, since version 8.0 it starts computing cache
file per hours.

Since version 4.0 sa_report.cgi will warm you to avoid out of memory when
you're entering a month view without caching.

=head2 Huge MTA activity

On MTA server with very huge activity you can experience out of memory or
wait a very long time before seeing anything in day view. In this case you
must run by cron job the perl script sa_cache with the -a option to build
cache files for the current day. Statistics will not be shown in realtime but
only at the time of the last sa_cache run. You can run it each five minute for
example as follow:

    */5 * * * * /usr/local/sendmailanalyzer/sa_cache -a

or

    */5 * * * * /usr/local/sendmailanalyzer/sa_cache --actual-day-only

It will only parse data stored in the current day so five minutes interval
may be enough for most cases.

=head2 Database

SendmailAnalyzer stores data into flat file database. Data is stored in
a time hierarchical directory structure ending at daily level. This structure
is composed as follows : 'mailhost'/year/month/day/
In each day repository you can find the following data files:

	senders.dat: senders informations.
	recipient.dat: recipients informations.
	spam.dat: spams informations.
	virus.dat: viruses informations.
	rejected.dat: rejected mail informations.
	dsn.dat: Delivery Status Notification report
	syserr.dat: SYSERR MTA informations.
	other.dat: other message grabbed into the log file.
	auth.dat: SMTP auth message grabbed into the log file.
	miltername.dat: message related to a milter, antivir or antispam.

The format of each file is explained in the SendmailAnalyzer code source.

=head2 Archiving

When sa_cache is run and following the value of the FREE_SPACE configuration
option it will try to archive data older than the current month. If FREE_SPACE
is set to 'delete' sa_cache will simply remove the data file from disk. If you
set it to 'archive', sa_cache will build a gzipped tarball for all daily data
files into the corresponding month directory and then remove data files from
disk.

If you set it to 'none', data files are kept.

If your primary concern is disk space saving set it to 'delete'. If you
want to preserve data for a year or more you can safely set it to 'archive'.
For your information one of my server has 100,000 inbound messages a day and
a year of 'archive' storage take around 1Gb and a 'delete' storage around
250Mb.

One advantage of the 'archive' method is that you can replay the cached stats
(for example after an upgrade to fix a sa_cache bug :-). In this case, you
just have to delete any cache file and extract all tarballs as follows:

	find /path/to/SendmailReport/ -name "cache.pm*" | xargs -i rm -f {}
	find /path/to/SendmailReport/ -name "history.tar.gz" | xargs -i \
		tar xzf {} --directory /

and then rerun sa_cache again.

Important: running sa_cache in one pass on en entire year could cost a lot
of resources and takes very long time. In this case add a second argument to
the command line giving the year/month to proceed, for example:

	sa_cache -s 'mailhost' -d "2008/06"

repeat this command for each month.

On huge MTA freeing space each month may not be enough. The WEEKLY_FREE_SPACE
configuration directive will force sa_cache to free space each week when enabled.
By default it is disabled.

=head1 CONFIGURATION

The default path to configuration file is /etc/sendmailanalyzer.conf If you want
to change this path, please edit cgi-bin/sa_report.cgi, sa_cache to match your
needs. For sendmailanalyzer use the --config|-c command line argument.

The configuration file consists of a text file with a configuration option
in upper case and a value or list of value separated by a tab character.

Here are the definitions of all those configuration directives.

=head2 System commands options

=over 4

=item TAIL_PROG

Path to the system tail command. Can be overwritten with --tail or -t in
sendmailanalyzer args. Default is /usr/bin/tail.

=item TAIL_ARGS

Command line argument passed to the tail system command. Can be overwritten
with --args or -a in sendmailanalyzer args. Default is -n 0 -f.

=item ZCAT_PROG

Path to zcat system command used to parse compressed log file. Can be
overwritten with --zcat or -z in sendmailanalyzer args. Default is
/usr/bin/zcat.

=item FREE_SPACE

Select the freeing space method for data files older than the current month.
The value can be:

	- delete: definitively remove all data files.
	- archive: make a gzipped tarball of data files before deleting them.
	- none: don't do anything. Need lot of space disk.

Default is archive.

=back

=head2 Input/output options

=over 4

=item LOG_FILE

Path to the maillog file to analyse. Can be overwritten with --log or -l
in sendmailanalyzer args. Default is /var/log/maillog. If the extension
is .gz SendmailAnalyzer will automatically use zcat to parse the compressed
log. For Postfix you may use /var/log/mail.log instead.

=item JOURNALCTL_CMD

Use it to set the journalctl command to use instead of log file entry. For
example, with postfix it migth be set to the following:

	JOURNALCTL_CMD	journalctl -u postfix

and for sendmail:

	JOURNALCTL_CMD	journalctl -u sendmail

When enabled, the LOG_FILE configuration directive above is just ommitted.
The additional option: --output="short-iso" is also always used to format
timestamp.

In incremental mode sendmailanalyzer will automatically set the --since option
to the last parsed timestamp to prevent loading previous messages.

Note that in daemon mode sendmailanalyzer will automatically add the -f option
to the command. Can be overwritten with --journalctl or -j options.

=item OUT_DIR

Output directory for data storage. Can be overwritten with --output or -o
in sendmailanalyzer args. The directory must exist, being writable by
the user running sendmailanalyzer and sa_cache. It must be readable
by the http user for CGI script sa_report.cgi.
Default is /var/www/sendmailanalyzer

=item DEBUG

Turn on/off debug/verbose output mode. Can be overwritten with --debug or -d
in sendmailanalyzer args. Default is 0, disable.

=item DELAY

Delay in second to flush collected data to disk. Can be overwritten with
--write-delay or -w in sendmailanalyzer args. Default is 60 seconds.
During this time data is kept in memory to limit disk I/O and gain speed.
If you experience an out of memory on huge mail server adjust this value
to something smaller depending on your hardware configuration.

=back


=head2 Reporting/display options

=over 4

=item ERROR_CODE

Path to SMTP error code file (relative to CGI directory) where sa_report.cgi
is running. Default: lang/ERROR_CODE.

=item LANG

Path to the translation file (relative to CGI directory) where sa_report.cgi
is running. Default: lang/en_US.

=item HTML_CHARSET

Used to define the HTML charset to use. Default is iso-8859-1, but with cyrillic
characters you have to use utf-8 instead.

=item URL_LOGO

Url to the barorng image. Default: salogo.gif

=item URL_JSCRIPT

Url to the flotr2 javascript library. Default: flotr2.js

=item URL_SORTABLE

Url to the sorttable javascript library. Default: sorttable.js

=item TOP

Number of object displayed in the top statistics. Default is 25.

=item TOP_MBOX

Number of object displayed in the top email addresses statistics.
Default is 25.

=item MAX_RCPT

Max number of recipients per message where senders will be reported.
Default 25 recipients max.

=item MAX_SIZE	10000000

Max size in bytes per message where senders will be reported.
Default is 10000000.

=item MAX_LINE

Max lines to show in detail view. Default is 100.

=item SIZE_UNIT

Size Unit to use, default is Bytes. Other values are KBytes and MBytes.

=item DOMAIN_REPORT

Compute statistics and cache for a list of domains and display a link in the
front page for a per domain access. See DOMAIN_USER if you want to grant
special access to these pages. You can have multiple DOMAIN_REPORT lines.
If you are running rsyslog with multiple hosts use DOMAIN_HOST_REPORT instead.
Example:

	DOMAIN_REPORT	domain1.com,domain2.com


=item DOMAIN_HOST_REPORT

Compute statistics and cache for the given host followed by a list of domains
and display a link in the front page for a per domain access under each host.
You can have multiple DOMAIN_HOST_REPORT lines. See DOMAIN_USER if you want
to grant special access to these pages. For example:

	DOMAIN_HOST_REPORT	host1	domain1.com,domain2.com
	DOMAIN_HOST_REPORT	host2	domain2.com,domain3.com

=item ANONYMIZE

This option allows the anonymization of the output, i.e. it removes any
sender/recipient personal information from the report.

=item REPLACE_HOST

This option replaces some hostname in all relay information for anonymization.
You must use one REPLACE_HOST line per replacement.

	REPLACE_HOST	internal.relay.dom	external.relay.dom

=item SPAM_VIEW

Enable/Disable menu links to Spam views. Default show it: 1

=item VIRUS_VIEW

Enable/Disable menu links to Virus views. Default show it: 1

=item DSN_VIEW

Enable/Disable menu links to Notification views. Default show it: 1

=item POSTGREY_VIEW

Enable/Disable menu links to Postgrey usage views. Default show it: 1

=item SHOW_DIRECTION

Enable/Disable messaging/spam/virus/dsn direction statistics. Default is show.
On some mailhost this could show wrong information if the direction could
not be easily determined. So you can remove these views by setting it to 0.

=item SPAM_TOOLS

List of antispam name separated by a comma used for Spam details view. You may
want to custom this list to just show menu link on available reports. Default
list is:

	spamdmilter,jchkmail,dnsbl,spamassassin,amavis,mimedefang,dnsblmilter,spamd,policydweight

Feel free to remove those you're not using to not see link to empty report in
the menu.

=item SHOW_SUBJECT

When enabled it allow email subjects to be shown in detailed view. Of course
The log file must contain this information. Default is disabled.

=back

=head2 Maillog parsing options

=over 4

=item FULL

Parse maillog from begining before running tail program. Can be overwritten
with --full or -f in sendmailanalyzer args. When enabled, default is to read
LAST_PARSED file to start from last collected event. Most of the time you may
want to enable this to jump at the last parsed line during the previous run.
If you always have fresh entries in your log, use FORCE instead. When FULL
and FORCE are disabled, sendmailanalyzer go directly to the end of the file
using the tail -f command.

=item FORCE

Parse maillog from the begining before running the tail program but force
sendmailanalyzer to never use the LAST_PARSED file. Can be overwritten with
command line option --force or -F.

=item BREAK

Do not run tail program and exit after a full parsing of the log file.
Can be overwritten with --break or -b in sendmailanalyzer args. Default
is 0, go ahead with tail.

=item MTA_NAME

Syslog name of the MTA. Syslog writes it to maillog with the pid as
... sendmail[1234] ... This is required to only parse relevant lines.
Can be overwritten with --sendmail or -s in sendmailanalyzer args.
Default is sendmail, some distro come with sm-mta instead. Some other
have multiple names (ex: sm-mta, sendmail and sm-msp-queue) in this
case you can set the value of this directive to a pipe separated list
of values, for example: sm-mta|sendmail|sm-msp-queue.

Default: sm-mta|sendmail|postfix|spampd

=item MAILSCAN_NAME

Syslog name of MailScanner. Syslog writes it to maillog with the pid as
... MailScanner[1234] ... This is required to only parse relevant lines
Can be overwritten with --mailscanner or -m in sendmailanalyzer args.
Default is MailScanner.

=item AMAVIS_NAME

Syslog name of Amavis. Syslog writes it to maillog with the pid as
... amavis[1234] ... This is required to only parse relevant lines.
Default is amavis.

=item MD_NAME

Syslog name of MimeDefang. Syslog writes it to maillog with the pid as
... mimedefang.pl[1234] ... This is required to only parse relevant lines
based on parsing mimedefang log generated by method md_graphdefang_log()
Default is mimedefang.pl.

=item CLAMD_NAME

Syslog name of Clamd. When using Mailscanner with clamd, if you want virus
reports, you must configure clamd to log with syslog and use LOG_MAIL. Default
value is 'clamd' (... clamd[1234] ...). Can be overwritten with --clamd or -n.

=item CLAMSMTPD_NAME

Syslog name of clamsmtpd. Default value is 'clamsmtpd' (... clamsmtpd: ...).

=item POSTGREY_NAME

Syslog name of Postgrey or sqlgrey. Syslog writes Postgrey to maillog with the
pid as follows: ... postgrey[1234] ... and sqlgrey as follow: ... sqlgrey: ...
This is required to only parse relevant logged lines. Can be overwritten with
--postgrey or -g. Default is set to postgrey|sqlgrey

=item SPAMD_NAME

Syslog name of Spamd. Syslog writes it to maillog with the pid as follow:
... spamd[1234] ... This is required to only parse relevant logged lines
Can be overwritten with --spamd. Default is spamd.

=item LOCAL_DOMAIN

Comma separated list of internal domains to be used when SendmailAnalyzer
is running on a mail host which received message from any side. SA can't
know what message are internal or external in this case, so the only way
to know if a mail come from Internet or Lan/Wan is to check the domain
part of the relay sender address. You can have multiple LOCAL_DOMAIN lines
for better reading.

For example:

	LOCAL_DOMAIN	domain1.com,domain2.com,...
	LOCAL_DOMAIN	domain3.com
	LOCAL_DOMAIN	domain4.com

=item LOCAL_HOST_DOMAIN

Same as above but with host distinction for use with rsyslog.
You can have multiple LOCAL_HOST_DOMAIN lines, ie: one per host.

For example:

	LOCAL_HOST_DOMAIN   sysloghost1        domain1.com,domain2.com
	LOCAL_HOST_DOMAIN   sysloghost2        domain3.com,domain4.com

=item MAIL_HUB

Comma separated ip addresses list of internal mail hubs, aka: where email
are redirected if the host is a gateway. For example: mailhost.mydom.dom
This directive is very important to help SendmailAnalyzer to find the
direction of incoming and outgoing message.

=item MAIL_GW

Comma separated ip addresses list of MTA gateways where external mail comes
from.  This directive is very important to help SendmailAnalyzer to find the
direction of incoming and outgoing message.

=item DEFAULT_DOMAIN

Default domain or hostname to add to an email address if there's just the
username. When the host is a delivery system it is possible that the user
email address do not have the domain part (ex: @domain.com). By default
SendmailAnalyzer will add the '@localhost' domain but you may want to change
this domain, so use this directive

=item SPAM_DETAIL

This directive allows report for Spam details. Enable by default. This allows
you to see complete detail of your favorite antispam as well as score, cache
hit and autolearn if your antispam reports it. To disable set it to 0, you
will save disk space.

=item SMTP_AUTH

This directive allows report for SMTP authentication. Enabled by default. This
allow you to see per authent type (server or client) user and relay statistics.
If you do not use SMTP Auth set it to 0 to disable this feature. These stats
are not available in per domain views.

=item MERGING_HOST

Use this directive to combine multiple mailhost reports on a single report.
This allows you to aggregate multiple mailhost that syslogs to a remote server
through rsyslog to have only one SendmailAnalyzer report. The value must only
use alphanumeric characters as it is used to create a subdirectory.

=item SKIP_RCPT_RELAY

Use this to set the recipient relay used for local delivery if your message
appears twice in details view and in messaging, sender and recipient counter.
This is especially right with postfix configured to have local delivery via
dovecot service. Default: dovecot, that means that recipient log lines with
relay=dovecot will instruct sendmailanalyzer to skip those messages. A common
value can also be 127.0.0.1 with MTA where the message is first sent locally.

=item EXCLUDE_TO

Use this directive to set a pipe separated list of destination email address
that should be excluded from the report. They will not be reported into data
files too. The value should be a valid regex, the addresses will be search
in all destination adresses with $TO =~ /^$EXCLUDE_TO$/. For example:

	EXCLUDE_TO      bcc-addr1\@domain1.com|bcc-addr2\@domain2.com

will exclude from report all recipient statistics sent to bcc-addr1@domain1.com
and bcc-addr2@domain2.com

=back

=head2 Domain / user views options

=over 4

=item LOW_LIMIT, MEDIUM_LIMIT, HIGH_LIMIT (NO MORE USED)

User messaging data limit in megabytes to show/warn the level of mail activity.
LOW_LIMIT (3 by default), mail activity under this limit is shown as green.
MEDIUM_LIMIT (5 by default), mail activity under this limit is shown as orange.
HIGH_LIMIT (10 by default), mail activity under this limit is shown as red.
above the hight limit the user is warn for abuse. Set all to 0 if you want to
disable this feature.

=item ADMIN

List of admin usernames separated by a comma that must have full access to all
report. The username is checked against the http REMOTE_USER environment
variable. By default anyone can access, in this case you may want to add a
.htaccess file.

=item DOMAIN_USER

List of per user domain access control. The first field is the username and
the second field (separated by tabulation) is a comma separated list of domain
names to be allowed to this user. You could add as many lines of DOMAIN_USER
as you want in the configuration file.

=back

=head1 ACCESS CONTROL

Access control is based on the REMOTE_USER environment variable stored by the
httpd server during an htaccess Authentication. If this variable is not set,
there is full access for anyone.

=head1 REBUILD / RECOVER LOG FILES

You have missed a bunch of log files or you want to rebuild your reports after
a sendmailanalyzer bug. What's the best way to go back and (re)parse your log
files to bring everything back upto date? 

If you want to restart from scratch, the best way is to proceed as follow:

	/etc/init.d/sendmailanalyzer stop
	rm -rf /usr/local/sendmailanalyzer/data/*
	for log in ls -tr /var/log/dmz-relays*
	do
	    /usr/local/sendmailanalyzer/sendmailanalyzer -b -f -i -l $log
	done
	/etc/init.d/sendmailanalyzer start

If you want to keep old data but just want to rewind for some days, you have
to stop sendmailanalyzer then remove all data directories corresponding to
these days and the data directories of the corresponding weeks and remove files
cache.pm in the month and year directories.

Before reparsing all wanted log files, you need to remove history file
/usr/local/sendmailanalyzer/data/LAST_PARSED . And then:

	for log in ls -tr /var/log/dmz-relays*
	do
	    /usr/local/sendmailanalyzer/sendmailanalyzer -b -f -i -l $log
	done
	/etc/init.d/sendmailanalyzer start

Data directory is build as follow for example:

	/usr/local/sendmailanalyzer/data/
	|-- LAST_PARSED
	|-- smtp-gw-hostname
	    |-- #year
		|-- #month
		|   |-- #day
		 ...
		|   |-- cache.pm
		|-- cache.pm
		|-- weeks
		    |-- #week
		     ...


=head1 AUTHOR

Gilles Darold <gilles @nospam@ darold.net>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2002-2017 Gilles Darold - All rights reserved.

	This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
	it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
	the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
	any later version.

	This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
	but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
	MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
	GNU General Public License for more details.

	You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
	along with this program.  If not, see < http://www.gnu.org/licenses/ >.

=head1 BUGS

Your volontee to help construct a better software by submitting bug report or
feature request as well as code contribution are welcome.


=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

Thank to Sendmail.org for the kind permission to use the "Bat" logo.

